Two years and the third Christmas celebration after the abduction of over 200 senior students of the Government Girls Secondary School, Chibok, Assistant Editor Seun Akioye investigates how the community has been able to rise from a shocking abduction that grabbed the attention of the world. Pa Wandazam Allen remembered the first time members of the terrorist group Boko Haram came to Chibok, a predominantly Christian community, in Southern Borno state. He also remembered the last time the attackers came to the community. “It is a tragedy,” he said several times holding his grey head in his right hand and heaved heavily. “They abducted those girls, they just took them away, we tried to find them but we could not enter into Sambisa forest,” the old retired teacher lamented. Pa Allen was sitting in his expansive compound in the middle of Chibok town; his house like most of the others was built of clay, with a new brick building about to be completed standing in the centre. As one of the elders of Chibok, the security of the community weighs heavily on his mind. “My friend called me on the phone that he had information Boko Haram was on its way to Chibok, 10 minutes after he called, we heard the loud sound of gunfire, then there were bombings and everyone started running everywhere,” he said. Pa Allen has a dramatic way of telling a bitter story which leaves one with an incredible urge to giggle. But there was no mirth in his voice as he went on to describe the arrival of Boko Haram fighters into the town from the western corridor, the loud sound of bombs which killed a soldier, his own dramatic escape and his brave return the following morning to join the chase of the insurgents. Chibok town has known a prosperous past as a farming community, the chief crops being maize, guinea corn, groundnut and beans. In the days of its prosperity, it was a shining example for religious tolerance and peaceful co-habitation. Predominantly Christian community, it has lived at most amiable conditions with its Muslim population, commerce had thrived and educational standards better than many of its neighbours. The community gained international attention after 276 schoolgirls were abducted from their hostels at the Government Girls Secondary School (GGSS) by Boko Haram fighters on April 14, 2014. The mode of execution of the plot had left many people insisting that no girl was abducted until the girls were safely inside Sambisa forest, a fortress of evil only about 40 kilometres from Chibok. Two years and the third Christmas without the majority of the abducted girls, how the community is moving ahead and what will Christmas be without the Chibok girls. For all its worldwide fame, a first-time visitor to Chibok would be shocked at the non-availability of basic infrastructures. There are two main roads into Chibok namely; Maiduguri/Damboa road and Mubi/Askira Uba road. But whichever road you take there is no respite from bad road, and the quicksand and when the wind blows, a hail of red dust welcomes you to Chibok. From Mubi, the good road ends in Danga and on the northern side, it ends in Damboa. Inside the town itself, there is no single tarred or graded road despite being the local government headquarters for 10 years. Chibok’s problem is beyond its terrible roads, the town of about 66,000 has no electricity, petrol station or bank. “The main transformers in Damboa and Mubi were blown up by Boko Haram about four years ago but they have repaired some, I still don’t know why we don’t have light yet,” Pa Allen asked no one in particular. Since the destruction of GGSS, there the Central Primary School has played host to both the Government Day Secondary School and the GGSS. The three schools rotate the lectures within the day with each school allotted about four hours every day before vacating the premises for another school to take over. Living in Chibok could try the patience of the most diligent, every end of the month, people send trusted relatives to Mubi with their Automated Teller Machine (ATM) cards for cash withdrawals. Cash is usually scarce in the town and inflation is rife, products coming into Chibok are usually twice the price one can get in Askira or Damboa leaving the impoverished people with little choice. This year, there has been less rain and harvest has been bad particularly for beans, nobody could explain why this was so and the farmers could only wrung their hands together and lift it to heaven in supplication. “Many people planted large fields of beans this year, but there has been terrible harvest, we don’t know why this has been so but it is not good,” Pa Allen said. Bitrus Wavi remembered the exact time he heard gunshots on April 14, 2014. The time according to him was 11:15 pm. The events of the night had always attached a sort of mystery to it, how could Boko Haram abduct over 200 teenagers willingly without protestations. Ahmadu Yidan is the Da Yidan Poga or the traditional head of Chibok; he said the events of that night left everyone in confusion. “Do you know that when these Boko Haram move they sometimes move with 100 vehicles, they have Lorries and there were some Lorries packed here in the town. They carried those ones. They started bombing all over and they went to the girls and said something is wrong, can’t you hear, we are soldiers, come inside this vehicle let us evacuate you to a safe place. “So the girls were thinking it was some of the soldiers around and some of the insurgents came in army uniform, so they rushed into the Lorries, had it been known they were Boko Haram they won’t go with 20 students. That night there was confusion, every animal even the cows were in confusion those who had BP died, a soldier died because of the bombing, nothing touched him,” Yidan said. After the initial confusion, the people of Chibok gathered and determined to pursue the fleeing terrorists. Armed with Dane guns, machetes, kitchen knives, sticks and stones, they made a blind dash towards Sambisa forest. Yidan: “Our vigilante pursued these people, they reached close to Sambisa but they had to turn back. People carrying sticks and Dane gun, if they had armed escort at the time it would not have been like this.” But some of the girls escaped, at least 56 of them were able to find their way back home. “After the girls saw that they were not soldiers, some of them jumped down and fractured their legs, others hung on the trees and dropped from the Lorries, those were the brave ones,” Esther Allen said. Yidan and his people believe the government left the rescue of the girls a little too late and are unimpressed by the rescue of 21 girls. But the proximity of Sambisa to Chibok gives the Yidan Poga sleepless nights. “Why should Sambisa exist? This is what I was thinking, why shouldn’t they make Sambisa become a desert? They should attack this Sambisa forest, it is true there will be collateral damage if they leave Sambisa and these people go to somewhere and kill more people and they run to Sambisa and you leave them because they are using human shields. “Sometimes I think would it not be better to attack Sambisa, we are not saying they should burn Sambisa, they should match gradually with these armoured weapons and bomb detectors, we know there will be some few casualties but I think it will not be wise to be leaving Sambisa for years because they are keeping some people and then allow many more to die, this is my personal thinking I really don’t know. It is giving me sleepless nights,” he lamented. The Chief said the people of Chibok are grateful to the world for the support it has received but Chibok remains a prime target for the terrorists.” They want attention, if they attack Chibok they will have a global attention that is why everyone must continue to speak up for us.” Around 6:00 am on Christmas day 2016, the voice of an itinerant preacher broke through the violet cold wind which had descended on the town. Moving from one dusty street to the other, he yelled into a loudspeaker “God is wonderful, his mercies endureth forever.” Soon he began to describe the “enduring loving of Christ” and urged those who are yet to do so to turn their lives over to Jesus Christ after which he wished everyone a “happy Christmas.”  The people of Chibok who may have heard the unknown preacher could relate to the message of “the mercies of the Lord,” which the long-suffering people of the town are badly in need of.   Pa Allen wore his white agbada and began to walk with great strides to the EYN, Lutheran Church of Christ LCC. The church would witness its first Christmas celebration in the new building partially paid for by the Borno State Government. All over Chibok, children braved the harmattan and the wind to observe the age-long tradition of exchange of food especially with their Muslim neighbours. During the 2014 attack, all the churches in Chibok were destroyed, the EYN  lost everything and it took a long time to recover. The service was conducted in a mixture of Hausa and Kibaku, the language of the Chibok people. There was no instrument and the microphone constantly misbehaves, the choir master hums the hymn and then the congregation followed, it was a solemn service by a determined people. The  pastor  preached from Isaiah 62:8 “Surely, I will no longer give your food as grain for your enemies; and the sons of the foreigner shall not drink your new wine, for which you have laboured.” It was a scripture that the people can relate to especially the displaced people of nearby Kumjalari whose grains are currently food for Boko Haram insurgents. The parishioners have thrown their fears into the singing, groups came up one after the other to sing and ‘raise some dust’ with rigorous and energetic dancing. And sometimes, they sang sorrowful songs, a very emotional moment for the grieving parents. Nothing can be taken for granted in Chibok, earlier in December, the people received a letter purportedly from Boko Haram informing them of an impending attack on December 15 or 16 2016. Security details in the town was tripled and a curfew from 6: pm to 6: was imposed on the main Aja road. For every service in the churches and mosques, a detachment of soldiers and vigilantes are deployed to provide reassurance. Pastor Peter Ayuba of LCC  said Christmas celebration in 2016 was the best since the abduction. “We have many more people despite the scare from Boko Haram, people turned out to praise God as we continue to hope that everything that was lost in this town will come back,” he said. At 2: pm, Chibok came alive; the village Christmas dance which was abandoned during the insurgency would hold this year. It has been the talk all day and the space opposite EYN 2 was already filled up. Security was provided and everyone going into the arena was screened. The dance carnival was the biggest gathering of the year and indigenes who had been in Maiduguri, Lagos and other cities were eager to prove their new social status. Everyone wore new clothes and shoes and carry on in pretended elitism. Inside the dance arena, dancers march around the drummers and singers. For hours they circle the musicians dancing to various local songs, kicking up so much dust and leaving everyone white as snow. At 5:10 pm, the dance came to an end and social connections began, young boys ran after the girls determined to impress with their new outfits. “Only a foolish girl will fall for these boys in borrowed shoes and Jackets,” Esther Allen said. In the night, the Allen homestead played host to a lot of young men and girls, who had come to lessen the night. It was the place to talk about the latest trends and impress with knowledge. One of the young people was 18-year-old Shuaibu Madu who considered himself superior to others because he had been to Lagos and spoke smattering Pidgin English. Shuaibu ran to Lagos when Boko Haram invaded the town where he stayed for one year in Ajah selling recharge cards. “ I am a Lagosian, now in Chibok all the girls are running after me, they are saying Lagosian come let me kiss you,” he said provoking prolong laughter into the teeth of the night. Shuaibu is better than his twin sister Awa, a Senior Secondary 2 students who could not speak any sentence in English. “This one is ‘mumu’ (dullard), I have been trying to teach her English but she no gree,” Shuaibu said dismissing his sister, who provoked by the attack, tried unsuccessfully to repel it in English. No homecoming for Chibok girls When news arrived in Chibok about the homecoming of the 21 freed school girls, there was wild jubilation especially among the relatives of the girls. There would be a lot to catch up on; there would be the Christmas celebration and the dance carnival to follow. None of the released girls came from Chibok town itself but from the surrounding villages and hamlets. Family members waited for the girls in Chibok, expecting to have some private moments with their daughters. The girls arrived in a convoy of security details and made straight for the expansive compound of the member representing Chibok in the State House of Assembly, Aimu Foni. But it was not the homecoming the people of Chibok had dreamt, there would be no church service on Christmas day, neither would the girls attend the anticipated Christmas dance carnival. The massive security build-up to the girls’ arrival saw the Brigade Commander, 28 Task Force Brigade Mubi, Brigadier General Felix Omoigui also relocating to Chibok.  Apart from the Army, there were the personnel of the Department of State Security (DSS) the Nigeria Police Special Anti-Robbery Squad (SARS) with the operational name of CRACK, the Nigeria Peace Corps, The Civilian Joint Task Force (CJTF), Borno State Vigilante Group, and the Baka Boys etc. The security operatives were assisted by two armoured tanks and several Ak-47 rifles, only the parents of the girls were allowed into the house and that is after vetting and delay. Since their arrival, the girls were not allowed to come out of the rooms despite their protestations. Family members who were fortunate to see them were not allowed to take pictures. “We have been waiting since 7:00am to see our daughter but the security is preventing us, we are not from Chibok and we have to ride a bicycle for two hours to get to our village, we do not understand why the government is hiding them,” a parent complained. The residents of Chibok began to resent the increasing restrictions on their movements around the Aimu Foni compound. A member of the vigilante group who was also drafted to the girls details said: “The grip of the military over the girls is stifling, what would have been better than putting the girls in a uniform and escorting them to the dance yesterday, let them mingle with their friends, it would have been a good therapeutic healing for the girls. “There are more than 3000 people at the carnival, what they are saying is that the lives of the 21 girls are more important than that of the whole of the people here at the dance,” he said. The Nation also gathered from relatives who had seen the girls that there was something close to a mutiny as the girls continued to demand a chance to come out to Chibok town if not to their own villages. It was also learnt that the girls went on hunger strike on December 24, to press home their claims. But a high-ranking security operative told The Nation that the security of the girls is of utmost importance. The official who pleaded anonymity said there are security reports that Boko Haram may want to embarrass the government by recapturing the girls. “The families should please exercise patience, we have a red alert and we have instructions to protect these girls with everything we have got. Soon, everything will be okay,” the official said. Many of the soldiers deployed to Chibok are veterans of the war on the insurgency in the Northeast. According to some of them who spoke on strict conditions of anonymity, they had seen action in faraway places like Birte, Mubi, Alaganna, Biu and Sambisa forest.  “We were the ones that captured Mubi, it was a fierce battle but we drove away the Boko Haram and killed so many of them,” a private soldier said as he held on firmly to his Ak-47 rifle. The soldier later went to Biu where he described an elaborate fight against the insurgents which resulted in the total annihilation of the terrorists. “Chibok is peaceful, that is why people can go to church, I have been here for only eight months and I have not seen anything unusual, we are hoping by next year we will be able to go home back to normal duties,” he said. His team leader a Corporal wearing crisp, clean uniform agreed with him. “Our Baba (Chief of Army Staff, Lieutenant General Turkur Buratai) has said we will return to the barracks next year, we believe in honestly.  I cannot wait to see my family again.” The Corporal was one of the soldiers who retook Chibok from the insurgents. To prove the veracity of his claims, he took out his phone and opened to a note he had on it. “See, I wrote it down that day. November 13th, 2014, Chibok on fire,” he then gave a handsome smile which lit up his youthful face. “You cannot stand here, when those people came, it was like a herd of cows, my brother, it was fire that day, no one can forget.” There has been relative peace in Chibok ever since thanks to the successive innovative commanding officers posted to the town. Holding and locking down Chibok is no mean task as the town is surrounded by villages still in the hands of the insurgents and the borders are porous and almost endless, giving terrorists multiple options of entry. One of the innovative ways introduced by the army is the motorcycle patrol of the various entry points into the town.  Armed soldiers made a duty of cycling round the bush into the far outposts of the town, every day. Also, communication posts are built all around Chibok; The Nation also ventured far into the borders around the town and found soldiers in trenches in the bush.  One location was commanded by a Lieutenant who was assisted by a Staff Sergeant. Despite the haze and cold, the soldiers remained at their duty post, they looked white, eyes devoid of sleep and their palms were coarse and hard when they shook hands. The soldiers have been able to integrate with the local population; they visit the markets, attend to the needs of the people and provide specialized services for them. The people have also come to trust the soldiers knowing many of them by name. On Christmas day, many families tried to outdo each other in providing food and drinks for the security personnel.” The people here appreciate us, some of us are learning the language to better interact with them and win their trust,” a soldier said. The soldiers too have known fear. On the night of the abduction, only 15 men were on guard in the town led by a Lieutenant Godknows.  It was a bad night for the soldiers, outgunned, outnumbered and caught in surprise, the soldiers retreated, one died from the shock, “Boko Haram didn’t touch him, it was the shock that killed him,” an elder said. But there is anger in Chibok over the fate of Lieutenant Godknows and his men. There were rumours that they were court-martialed and jailed for failing in Chibok. The Nation could not confirm the true position before the publication of this story. “It is not cowardness to withdraw when you are faced with a superior power, what will 15 soldiers do when Boko Haram came with over 200 fighters with RPG and heavy artillery, even the US Marines cannot withstand them. We are asking the government to release Godknows, he did the best for us and we are unhappy that he is being punished,” a CJTF member who said he joined in the war as a tribute to Godknows said. Chibok IDPs: We are left to suffer On the northern outpost of Chibok, there are 20 new building built of red bricks lying in a rectangular form. These buildings house the Internally Displaced Persons (IDPs) from nearby villages of Kumjalari, Kubrivu, Kaumutayahi, Kakilmari and Kwada. The houses were built by the United Nations High Commission for Refugees (UNHCR). On Christmas day, about six children played in the sand in front of one of the houses, the house belonged to  Sunday Garba, the spokesperson of the IDPs. In 2014, he had escaped from Kumjalari with his family after Boko Haram struck. Now resident in Chibok, life could not have been more bitter. “There is no Christmas for these children,” he said pointing to the bare feet, dirty children chasing each other in the sand. “Who will buy chicken for them, there is nothing for them to eat,” he said in a despondent voice. Garba had known prosperous past, he was a big time farmer harvesting more than 100 sacks of guinea corn, but that is now history, he now works as a farm hand in Chibok. Sunday Kabir has joined the local vigilante; it was his way of fighting back after he was forced to leave Kumjalari four years ago. “We have lost everything, we don’t have anything for Christmas so what do we do?” he lamented. The plight of the IDPs from the surrounding villages is telling. After the villages were sacked, they returned to their farms and planted. But as if on cue, Boko Haram fighters emerged from nowhere and chased the farmers away just as harvest was to begin. “When our wives tried to get some food from the farms so that we won’t starve, they were chased away by Boko Haram. The terrorists have harvested our guinea corn and they are right now as we speak harvesting our beans, how do we survive now?” Kabir asked. In Chibok, there are more than 200 IDPs living in squalor, at least two families share one room and conveniences are open to many more families. Here, there is neither privacy nor decency. “We are suffering here; we have no food, no mat to sleep on and no clothes. Many of us escaped with nothing except the clothes on our backs,” Garba said. Even though much of Borno state has been retaken from the insurgents many villages around Chibok are still in the hands of the terrorists. A contingent of soldiers was stationed at Kwaja but the refugees accused the soldiers of not venturing to capture other villages around Kwaja. “When our wives went to harvest and were chased away, they ran to the soldiers in Kwaja which is only five kilometers from Kumjalari but the soldiers refused to follow them, also when we lost some CJTF people and asked the soldiers to escort us to remove the corpses, they refused,” Kabir alleged. While government and the international communities have focused attention on the IDP camps in the big cities, the refugees in Chibok are largely forgotten. With their food in the hands of Boko Haram, the refugees, once proud and prosperous farmers have resorted to begging. But Chibok is not a place to beg, whatever was left in the earth was not enough for the people and they can ill afford to feed extra mouths. “ That is why the children go hungry, they are not in school and they have no clothes to wear,” Kabir lamented. “If I am not released, let us meet in heaven” Paul Lailai and Yusuf Madu are united not only by their coming from the same  village of Bulabam but together in grief mourning their missing daughters. The two had left their village for the almost two hours bicycle ride to Chibok when they heard 21 colleagues of their daughters would be in town from Abuja. The girls who were recently released from Boko Haram captivity had been in the custody of the Federal Government. Two days before Christmas, they were ferried to Chibok to celebrate with their families. Paul and Madu hoped they would be able to get some information from the girls. Paul’s missing daughters are Ladi and Mary while Madu’s daughter is Christiana. “I did not see my children when the Boko Haram released their video, I cry everything I think about what they are going through,” Paul said. In the past two days, the two had remained in Chibok struggling to come to terms with the reality that they would not hug their children, at least not yet. When Madu spoke, his voice carried no strength, it sounded hollow and far away. “ I looked through the pictures released by Boko Haram and I didn’t see my daughter Christiana, that is why I came to find out if there is any news of her,” Madu said. He was in luck. One of the released girls had a message from Christiana to her parents and the message was not heartwarming. “She told one of the girls to tell us she is alive but there is no way she could escape. She said greet my parents and my younger ones, tell them if it is God’s will I will see them again, if not, we will meet in heaven. “When I heard that, I cried and did not eat, Christiana was the child who looked after me, sometimes I feel it is better I am not around in the world but I believe if I am alive I will see her again,” Madu said. The parents of the missing girls had lived in frustrated hope.” Whenever the local government calls us for a meeting and we return home, the mother would ask if it was good news, when we reply in the negative, all the women and the children would begin to cry,” Madu added. For 60-year-old Rebeka Nteke, the tears are yet to cease. When Abubakar Shekau released a video of the girls, she saw something that gave her grief and hope; her daughter, Hauwa Nteke. “I still thank God but I am looking for my daughter, I saw her in the video but I know one day she will be back,” she said and then  began to cry. Bitrus Yanna, the father of Ruth Bitrus fares no better. When Ruth was abducted, he joined the group of villagers who went after Boko Haram in the hope of finding the girls. “ I went as far as Selari and Zangore but I could not locate her. When it happened and the government did not believe us, I was very angry but now I have left everything in the hands of God while praying that she will return to us,” Yanna said. Mariam Wavi’s mother has remained devastated. Unable to cope with the abduction of her daughter, she has relocated to her ancestral village. Mariam’s absence has left a gaping hole in the lives of her parents because they are both blind.  Mariam’s brother, Bitrus has been consoling her, giving her hope.  “ What can we do, she is yet to return but we are hoping. Our mother is devastated because she was really the main helper of our parents,” he said. When Mariam was taken, Bitrus took a motorcycle, armed with a stick, he pursued the terrorists in vain, over two years after, he is struggling with the reality that she may not return. The other Army Paul Martins (surname changed) has been sitting on a tree trunk on Chibok- Damboa road for two hours, like the hundreds of schoolchildren who were dragged out of their holiday to welcome the governor, he was tired and hungry. “ The governor should have told us he is not coming, we have been waiting since 10:am, there is no food, there is no money, we are just here,” he groaned. Paul has more reasons to be despondent, as a member of the CJTF, he claimed he has not received any payment for the past six months since he signed up. “ We buy our own uniforms, we buy our own bullets and we don’t get paid to fight Boko Haram, we just feel that we cannot be running away from men like us,  we both have one life, lets exchange bullets and if I die, then that is it,” Paul said. But he has not always been brave, when the insurgents struck in November 2014, Paul trekked to Biu, encountered countless obstacles and found his way to Anambra state to his in-laws. Six months ago, tired of running, he came back to Chibok, signed up with the CJTF, bought his gun and bullets and went to the trenches. The security of Chibok though rests on the Army, credit must also be given to the CJTF and the local vigilante. Armed with Dane guns and local charms, the young boys and old hunters helped chase Boko Haram fighters away from Chibok. These volunteers according to investigations were spurred on by love for country and community and are not paid for their services. There was a man, one of the leaders of the CJTF in Chibok simply known as Bamal-Gana or Bagana. This Bagana was a great hunter, possessing terrifying magic; members of the CTJF claimed that he cannot be killed by iron or bullet. In the last week of November 2016, Bagana led some of his men to Shawar village, about 10 kilometers West of Chibok. “ We have secured the place but some of us stepped on these bomb they plant inside the ground (IED), then Boko Haram came out and started firing at us, we responded and killed some of them before we could get away but three of us died including Bagana,” one of the men who participated in the raid said. But the CJTF has not been able to recover the corpse of their fallen colleagues and properly mourn them. “Bagana was fearless, Boko Haram can’t kill him, even in battle when soldiers turn back he won’t, his death is a huge loss and the government has not even sent condolences to his family, he had three wives and many children,” the man said. Two other commanders who spoke to The Nation said if the CJTF had Ak-47 or a pump action rifle, they would vanquish Boko Haram in no time. “We fought with our cartridge guns  and  captured many towns, what we really need is a pump action we would finish Boko Haram, but who will buy it for us? The vigilante was reborn after the abduction of the school girls, since then, they have remained an integral part of the security apparatus of Chibok. Usually dressed in brown uniform, the vigilantes looked hungry and sad. Also working without salaries, they are poorly armed with Dane guns and charms. “We are here to protect our community, we may not be paid but we are determined to protect our families, we can’t just sit and wait for them to be captured again,” one of the vigilantes said. December 26, 2016 Activities began early in preparation for the visit of the governor of Borno state, Kashim Shetimma, a town crier had gone round the villages asking school children to dress in uniform to welcome the governor. Soon politicians arrived, intimidating the people with their security details, at 11: am, the students of the three schools lined up in the harmattan on Aja road, awaiting the governor. It was a wait for godot, the children stood in the dust for many hours as the governor was said to be in Damboa, there was no food or water for them, the teachers and security details also got frustrated. With strength failing, the children lay on the dusty dirty road, the teacher too at the end of their patience could only look on helpless. At exactly 3:00 pm, as if on cue, the students began to march to their homes, starting with the smaller kids, soon the welcome party was over, the kids were determined not to wait any longer despite protestations from the teachers. The governor finally arrived at 5:00 pm, but the majority of the relatives of the Chibok girls had left in anger unable to see their daughters. “ My village is two hours away, by 6:00 pm, there will be a curfew and I will have nowhere to sleep,” a parent who had spent the better part of the day in a shouting bout with the soldiers said. He then mounted his bicycle and began to ride furiously out of Chibok. Ten minutes later, the governor arrived. [news_list display=”tag” tag=”Chibok” sort=”ASC” count=”2″ show_more=”on”]